<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>

    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="../Styles/style.css" type="text/css"/>

    <title>Tape Mark 3</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    <header>
      <div class="pagetitle">Introduction</div>
    </header>

    <div class="introduction">
      <main>
     
        <p>
          <span>"</span>Tape Mark 3<span>"</span> is a series of generative
          poems inspired by the work <span>"</span>Tape Mark I<span>"</span> by
          Nanni Balestrini (Milan, 1935 - Rome, 2019) created in collaboration
          with IBM engineer Alberto Nobis and published in 1961.
        </p>

        <p>
          The present work bears the same title as the original one, but is marked with the number 3.
          Nanni Balestrini himself, created similar poems and published them in
          the collection <span>"</span>Come si agisce<span>"</span> edited by
          Feltrinelli in the year 1963 with the title <span>"</span>Tape Mark
          II<span>"</span>.
        </p>

        <p>
          The exegesis of "Tape Mark I" is documented in Balestrini's article published in the <span>"</span>Almanacco
          Letterario Bompiani 1962<span>"</span>. In his article, Balestrini explains that he didn't write the poem himself, but chose three verses from three poems written by three different poets. The poems were: "Hiroshima Diary" by Michihiko Hachiya (1955); "The Mystery of the Elevator" by Paul Goldwin (unfindable); "Tao Te Ching" by Laozi or Lao Tzu (4th century BC).</p>

        <p>
          The verses were then permutated and generated by the IBM 7070 computer
          and - in the words of Balestrini (Almanacco, p. 149) - "the results
          were magnetised on tape". In fact, the title of the poem derives from
          the name of IBM's actual 'tape marks'. Subsequently, Balestrini made
          minimal grammatical and punctuation changes to the text and published
          <a href="tape-mark-i.xhtml"> the poem "Tape Mark I"</a> in print format.
        </p>

        <p>
          The instructions and the algorithm of "Tape Mark I" were programmed by
          Nobis. The IBM computer became obsolete and for many years, the
          digital file of the poem only existed in the form of <a href="algorithm-scheme.xhtml">the scheme of the
          algorithm</a> published in the “Almanacco Letterario 1962 Bompiani”
          (Almanacco, p. 147).
        </p>
        
        <h3>The scheme of the algorithm has always aroused fascination and interest in me, above all when I was writing my master's thesis in 2012. The scheme was the proof that the animation was generated by code and I was left to wonder how to do that.</h3>
        <p>
          In 2013, a new version of “Tape Mark 1” was written in Perl by Wayne Clements
          and published on the web page <a href="http://www.in-vacua.com/cgi-bin/tapemark.pl" target="_blank">in-vacua.com</a><span>.</span>
        </p>

        <p>
          In 2018, a team formed by Emiliano Russo, Gabriele Zaverio, and Vittorio
          Bellanich created another version written in Python which is
          available on the web page
          <a href="https://museo.freaknet.org/en/tape-mark-1-nanni-balestrini-ricerca-ricostruzione-storica/" target="_blank">museo.freaknet.org</a><span>.</span>
        </p>

        <p>
          In 2021, I published "Tape Mark 3" written in Perl adapting Clements'
          code. A year later, I created a new web page on a cloud server that
          doesn't support Perl. A web developer offered himself to translate the
          Perl code into PHP and the poem is now available on my web page
          <a href="https://www.edgedpub.com/Tape_Mark_3.php?" target="_blank">edgedpub.com</a><span>.</span>
        </p><br />

        <p>
          “Tape Mark 3” follows the same principles and mode of work as “Tape
          Mark I”. The original poems used to create this series are three poems
          written by three different poets. These are “Limits” by Jorge Luis
          Borges; “I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud” by William Wordsworth; “Perhaps
          One Morning Walking” by Eugenio Montale.
        </p>

        <p>
          I chose three poems that are thematically different - just like
          Balestrini who chose "tre brani tematicamente differenti"
          (Almanacco, p. 145) - except for a few but important similarities of
          the content. All three poems show a lonely man absorbed in his
          thoughts, walking and looking at nature and the topics adressed in the
          poems are <em>limits</em>, <em>margins</em>, <em>infinity</em>, and
          <em>loneliness</em>. The three poems, therefore, share the same
          semantic field and the verbs are expressed in first person singular.
          These common factors result in consistancy in every possible variation that can be generated.
        </p>

        <p>
          “Tape Mark 3” consists of six different poems enumerated from 3.1 to
          3.6. Versions 01 and 02 are written by me; versions 03 and 04 are
          variations of two poems written by Nick Montfort; versions 05 and 06 are
          written with a code copied from “Poesie elettroniche” written by
          Fabrizio Venerandi. Both Montfort and Venerandi have given permission
          to copy their code as long as it is declared in the newly created
          files.
        </p>
<p>I intentionally included these versions using code files written by others to show that in digital culture, appropriation can occur at the software level through copying code, in the same way that poets in the Middle Age copied the structures of sonnets, odes, ballads and other poetic forms. Besides that, I was intrigued by the possibility of sharing code files according to the Open-Source culture, which constitutes a siginificant part of my work in digital publishing. </p>
<p> During my research, I learned that Montfort's poem is the digital version of a poem written by Coetzee. As I explain in the 'References', Coetzee used human language in the same way as prgoramming language. This was a fascinating concept, which prompted me to include it in my work to show the relationship and the mutual influence of code and human language.
        </p>

        <h3>As an undergraduate student, I became convinced that linguistics could be used to develop theory. Human language is dynamic and performative and has many other characteristics that seemed to me suitable for application in other fields. Eventually, I found confirmation of my intuition in the Speech Act theory, which forms the basis of my PhD research study.</h3>
      
        <p>
          Finally, "Tape Mark 3" is a sample work to show the performative
          materiality of code. The poems that I chose for my work are pertinent
          with my research. In an interview given to Emiliano Russo, Balestrini
          compares his poem with a theatre show:
        </p>
        <div class="quote">
          <p>
            "The text is the representation, and the algorithm is the booklet of
            the theatrical play."
          </p>
        </div>
        <p>
          In other words, the poem is the stage play or performance, and the
          algorithm is the booklet with the instructions for the performance.
          (See the full interview with Balestrini in the video below; English subtitiles are available.)
        </p>
        <p>
          The code files of "Tape Mark 3" are available on the the Github
          repository
          <a href="https://github.com/edgedpub/Tape-Mark-3" target="_blank">github.com/edgedpub/Tape-Mark-3.</a>
        </p>

      </main>
    </div>
</body>
</html>