<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html lang="en" xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8"/>

    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0"/>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../Styles/style.css"/>

    <title>Tape Mark 3</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    <header>
      <div class="pagetitle">References</div>
    </header>


    <div class="content-box">
      <main>
        <h1>Notes on the poems</h1>

        <h1>Notes on Versions 01 and 02</h1>

        <p>Versions 01 and 02 are two generative poems, which follow the example of Balestrini's generative poem created with the algorithm designed by Nobis. In order to reproduce the shuffling of verse parts with JavaScript, I translated or transcoded the algorithm into the so-called "Fisher-Yates shuffle algorithm".</p>
<p>To furhter exploit the EPUB's technology further, I added the sun-animation in Version 02. The sun and the natural landscape are recurrent themes in all the three poems that make up "Tape Mark 3.</p>

        <h1>Notes on Version 03</h1>

        <p>
          Version 03 is a static poem generated with JavaScript. It's a list of
          all the possible variations that can be created with 5 words. There is
          no interaction required. You can merely scroll down the page to read
          all verses.
        </p>

        <p>
          This poem is based on the work "Permutation Poems" by Nick Montfort
          published on the web page
          <a href="https://nickm.com/memslam/" target="_blank">Memory Slam</a>.
        </p>

        <p>
          On the web page, Nick Montfort writes:</p>
        
        <div class="quote">
          "This program is deterministic, and presents all permutations of
          whatever words are listed at the top. To see it do something
          different, view source, copy everything, open a text editor, paste the
          HTML &amp; JavaScript that you copied into it, edit the words list,
          and save the file. Then, open the file you saved in a browser. You can
          use fewer or more words, too."
        </div>

        <p>
          The "Permutation Poems" were originally conceived by Brion Gysin and
          Ian Sommerville in 1965. In a comment within the code file, Nick
          Montfort explains further that:</p>
        <div class="quote">
          "I do not know the exact year of the corresponding program. The poem
          was written manually in 1959 and other permutation poems were
          broadcast by the BBC in 1960. Around 1960 is sometimes given as a
          date. However the Honeywell Series 200 Model 120, indicated in several
          places as the computer used, was not released until 1965. Please let
          me know if you know that a different computer was used or know the
          exact year in which the permutation poem programs were written. Since
          writing this, I've found a few French books that cite the year as
          1956, so that is my guess (-nm, 2018)".
        </div>

        <h1>Notes on Version 04</h1>

        <p>
          Version 04 is a generative poem based on the work "Generator of
          Five-Word Lines, v1.0" by Nick Montfort which was also published on
          the web page
          <a href="https://nickm.com/memslam/" target="_blank">Memory Slam</a>.
        </p>

        <p>
          As Nick Montfort writes on his page:</p>
            
            <div class="quote">
          "This is a speculative reimplementation, based on one page of output
          from an untitled project by Coetzee."
        </div>

        <p>
          Coetzee's work is remarkable and relevant to the discourse on the performative materiality and linguistic characteristics of code. His poems, written in the 1960s, are an attempt to write verse in a machinic style, imitating the language of computers. A brief description of this writing style can be found in an article, published by Rebecca Roach in 2017, which I have reproduced here:</p>

 <p><a href="coetzee-computer-poem.xhtml">"The computer poetry of J. M. Coetzee’s early programming career"</a>.
        </p>

        <h1>Notes on Versions 05 and 06</h1>

        <p>
          These poems are created with the code files written by Fabrizio
          Venerandi in his work "Poesie Elettroniche" published in 2017.
        </p>

        <p>
          The reproduction of these poems are consented by the author. In the
          introduction of his Electronic Poems, Venerandi writes:</p>
          <div class="quote">
          "Warning to other poets: these poems are a DRM-free EPUB3. I wrote
          these poems so that there was a separation between text and code, so
          that the whole ebook can serve as a workshop for rewrites and mash
          ups. Mine is an invitation: take my texts, delete them from the XHTML
          pages inside the ebook, and replace them with your own verses. The
          ebook will continue to function using your poem instead of mine."
        </div>

        <p>More precisely the files in the section ...</p>
      </main>
    </div>
</body>
</html>